{"candidateId":"bias-variance-tradeoff-v0-001","subjectId":"bias-variance-tradeoff","promptVariantId":"whiteboard-v0","criteria":[{"id":"payoff-concreteness","label":"Payoff concreteness","max":8,"score":6,"notes":"The payoff states a precise decomposition formula and names the structural consequence (U-shaped curve with minimum at intermediate complexity). It uses mathematical precision (Bias-squared + Variance + irreducible noise) rather than vague language. Loses 2 points because it lacks a concrete numerical stake or real-world consequence (e.g., a quantified example of overfitting cost) that would sharpen why a learner should care."},{"id":"staircase-coherence","label":"Staircase coherence","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"Rungs build cleanly: error has structure, Bias defined, Variance defined, decomposition formula, complexity relationship for each, U-curve emerges, practical tools. Rung 4 (the formula) appears after rungs 2 and 3 define terms, which is slightly out of order relative to the narration which introduces the formula at second beat before defining terms. Minor sequencing gap but the logical progression is sound. No rung is redundant or skips a prerequisite."},{"id":"destination-precision","label":"Destination precision","max":8,"score":8,"notes":"The destination is highly precise: learner can state the exact formula E[test error] = Bias^2 + Variance + sigma^2, explain each term geometrically, and explain why test error is U-shaped as a function of model complexity. Naming three distinct verifiable competencies (state, explain each term, explain U-shape) is exactly what a 7-8 score requires."},{"id":"narration-clarity","label":"Narration clarity","max":12,"score":10,"notes":"Nearly all terms are defined on first use: 'test error' is defined as 'how wrong your model is on data it has never seen'; Bias is defined with the averaging-across-training-sets explanation; Variance is defined with the fluctuation framing; sigma^2 is defined as irreducible noise. 'Model capacity' is introduced at ~96s and immediately unpacked as 'the complexity of our model family, for example going from degree one to degree ten polynomial.' Minor issue: 'data-generating process' in the sigma paragraph is used without unpacking, which could confuse an intro learner. Sentences are concrete and the line/polynomial contrast is vivid. No contradictions found."},{"id":"board-specificity","label":"Board specificity","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"All draw actions are renderer-executable: bias_diagram specifies axes labels, a named curved arc, a named straight line, and a labeled double-headed arrow at a specific x position. variance_diagram specifies five named jagged curves passing near six scattered dots around a gentle arc, with divergence behavior at ends. The U-curve sequence specifies colors, labels, and the minimum x position (0.45). The only minor gap is 'gentle arc' in variance_diagram leaves curve shape somewhat open, and 'six dots scattered' does not place them. Small deductions for these underspecifications."},{"id":"board-coherence","label":"Board coherence","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"Timeline is well-sequenced: title written first, decomposition formula written before terms are defined on board, each term defined before its diagram appears, complexity axes drawn before individual curves, curves drawn in the right order (bias then variance then total), sweet_spot_marker drawn after the U-curve exists, highlights reference existing elements. One minor issue: at t=170 the 'test_error_label' written at t=12 is erased, which is functionally fine but the label is somewhat redundant with the decomp_eq; erasing it late slightly disrupts the board story. The erase at t=170 comes after tools_label is written at t=160, which respects the lesson's conclusion. Canvas plausibility is maintained across all moments."},{"id":"board-visual-balance","label":"Board visual balance","max":8,"score":8,"notes":"The lesson has an excellent mix: 5 write actions and 9 draw actions across 17 total actions. Two geometric diagrams (bias and variance illustrations) plus a full 4-layer complexity curve plot (axes, bias curve, variance curve, total curve, sweet-spot marker) plus two highlights and one erase. This is well above the minimum for a topic that strongly admits diagram treatment. The visual progression from geometric intuition to quantitative U-curve is pedagogically appropriate."},{"id":"math-notation-correctness","label":"Math and notation correctness","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"E[test error] = Bias^2 + Variance + sigma^2 is the standard bias-variance decomposition formula, correctly stated. Bias and Variance are used consistently: Bias is always the systematic component, Variance always the fluctuation component. The narration correctly says 'Bias squared plus Variance' when describing the U-curve sum (not 'Bias plus Variance squared'). Sigma^2 is correctly framed as the irreducible floor. Minor notation issue: in narration the formula is written as 'Bias squared plus Variance plus sigma squared' but in board content 'Bias^2 + Variance + sigma^2' -- technically Variance should be written as Var(f(x)) or similar to be fully consistent with the formula where the Variance term is already a squared quantity in some textbook conventions; however, the standard ML convention used here (Var not Var^2) is correct."},{"id":"code-content-decision","label":"Code-content decision","max":6,"score":6,"notes":"No code is present. For an intro-level conceptual lesson on the bias-variance tradeoff at 4 minutes, the correct decision is to omit code: the mechanism is mathematical and geometric, not algorithmic. Including sklearn or numpy code would shift focus from the decomposition concept to implementation details, which is not the lesson goal. The absence of code is exactly right here."},{"id":"pacing-and-density","label":"Pacing and density","max":10,"score":8,"notes":"10 beats over 240 seconds averages 24 seconds per beat, which is appropriate for intro level. Individual beats are reasonably sized: the longest single beat at t=32 covers Bias definition and geometric example (~23 seconds of narration). The t=130 beat covering the U-curve argument is slightly dense (introduces U-shape, two dominance regimes, and the sweet spot concept in one beat spanning 30 seconds to t=160), but not egregiously so. The gap between t=160 (tools beat) and t=240 (end) has board activity (erase, highlight at 170/172) but no narration beat, which is a minor pacing gap. Total narration text ends well before 240s based on word count, suggesting the durationSeconds is slightly over-allocated."},{"id":"redundancy-and-focus","label":"Redundancy and focus","max":8,"score":7,"notes":"The lesson stays tightly on the question: why does increasing model capacity not always reduce test error. No tangents. Minor redundancy: the narration fullText and the beats substantially restate each other in overlapping language (e.g., the house prices hook appears in both, the decomposition equation appears in both, the U-curve argument appears verbatim in both). This is structural (fullText is meant to be the complete narration) so it is not a pedagogical flaw, but the beats at t=130 and t=160 together re-cover the U-curve argument that was already built up, with slight restatement."}],"totalScore":89,"maxScore":100,"percent":89,"topThreeIssues":["The narration introduces the decomposition formula (beat at t=20) before Bias and Variance are defined (beats at t=32 and t=55), creating a forward-reference that could confuse intro learners; the staircase should define terms before presenting the formula they compose","The pacing gap between t=160 and t=240 has no narration beat despite 80 seconds remaining, and the fullText narration ends at approximately 200 seconds worth of content, suggesting the durationSeconds is over-allocated or a concluding beat summarizing the key takeaway is missing","The term 'data-generating process' in the sigma^2 paragraph is used without definition, which is a jargon gap for intro-level learners who may not know what a DGP is"],"wouldRecommendForPipeline":true,"summary":"This is a strong intro-level lesson plan with precise destination, excellent board visual variety, and mathematically correct notation throughout. The main structural flaw is that the decomposition formula is shown to learners before its component terms are defined, which inverts the natural cognitive order for a beginner audience. With a reordering of early beats and a closing narration beat to fill the final 80 seconds, this plan would be production-ready."}
