{"candidateId":"dropout-regularization-v0-001","subjectId":"dropout-regularization","promptVariantId":"whiteboard-v0","criteria":[{"id":"payoff-concreteness","label":"Payoff concreteness","max":8,"score":7,"notes":"The payoff names a specific mechanism (implicit ensemble of 2^n subnetworks), a specific number (2^n), and a specific technique (weight scaling by keep-probability p). It directly answers both halves of the lesson question. Loses one point because it does not state a concrete stake for the learner (e.g., typical generalization gain on a benchmark) -- it is mechanistically sharp but motivationally generic."},{"id":"staircase-coherence","label":"Staircase coherence","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"Six rungs build cleanly: overfit problem -> dropout mechanism -> per-mini-batch subnetwork -> 2^n ensemble -> weight-scaling test-time trick -> co-adaptation broken. Each rung is strictly prerequisite for the next. Minor issue: rung 6 ('Connect the geometric intuition: co-adaptation is broken') is listed last but is conceptually a consequence of rung 3 and could cause slight sequencing confusion; in narration it is handled mid-lesson, not at the end. Not a serious gap but slightly out of order."},{"id":"destination-precision","label":"Destination precision","max":8,"score":8,"notes":"The destination is maximally precise: it names the mechanism (zeroing with probability 1-p), the formula direction (multiply by p at test time or divide by p during training), the object count (2^n), and the geometric mean approximation. A learner can reproduce this sentence to reconstruct the core algorithm. Full credit."},{"id":"narration-clarity","label":"Narration clarity","max":12,"score":10,"notes":"Nearly all jargon is defined on first use: 'regularization technique', 'keep probability p', 'thinned network', 'implicit ensemble', 'variance', 'inverted dropout' all get inline definitions. 'Co-adaptation' is named and unpacked. The symbol p is introduced with its typical value. Minor deduction: 'geometric mean' appears in the destination statement but is not used or defined in the narration itself -- the narration says 'approximating the ensemble average' without naming the geometric mean, creating a slight mismatch between lesson.destination and narration. Also 'Srivastava and Hinton in 2014' is cited without unpacking that this is the original dropout paper, which is minor but slightly assumptive for intro learners."},{"id":"board-specificity","label":"Board specificity","max":10,"score":8,"notes":"The two 'draw' actions for full_net and full_net_test are concrete: node counts, node labels (i1,i2,i3,h1-h4,o1), connectivity (every i to every h, every h to o1), and explicit labels are specified. The thinned_net draw is also concrete (cross out h2 and h4 with X marks). Write actions contain the actual text content, not placeholders. Deduction: region descriptors like 'center-below-dropout_def' and 'right-below-thinned_net' are informal relative anchors that a renderer must interpret; they are not pixel or grid coordinates, and multiple entries share regions like 'left' and 'center' without disambiguating vertical stacking order, which could cause collision. The 'highlight' actions name targetId but give no color or visual style."},{"id":"board-coherence","label":"Board coherence","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"The timeline is logical: title and problem framing appear first, the full network is drawn before the thinned version, highlights reference previously written elements, test-time content is introduced after training content, erases at t=138 and t=210 reduce clutter before new material. The summary box at t=210 consolidates rather than introduces new content. Minor: at t=106 both 'coadapt_label' and 'independence_note' are written to region 'left' simultaneously with 'variance_note' to 'left-center', risking spatial crowding. The erase of 'scaling_note' at t=210 is reasonable housekeeping. No element is highlighted or erased without prior introduction."},{"id":"board-visual-balance","label":"Board visual balance","max":8,"score":7,"notes":"The board has three draw actions (full_net, thinned_net, full_net_test), two highlight actions, two erase actions, and many write actions. For a neural network topic, three network diagrams is appropriate and the thinned vs. full comparison is the key visual. The mix is reasonable. Slight deduction: no diagram illustrates the ensemble abstraction or the weight-scaling formula visually (e.g., a simple W_test = p * W_train annotated on a single edge), leaving the mathematical relationship as text-only."},{"id":"math-notation-correctness","label":"Math and notation correctness","max":10,"score":7,"notes":"Core math is correct: dropout probability (1-p) for zeroing, scaling by p at test time, 2^n subnetworks for n units. Inverted dropout description (divide survivors by p during training, no test-time change) is correct. However, one consistency issue: at t=60 the board writes 'divide by p to keep expected sum constant' (this is inverted dropout scaling during training), but the narration at the same beat says 'units that survive are scaled so the expected sum into the next layer stays the same' without specifying direction. Then at t=138 the lesson introduces weight scaling as 'multiply each weight by p' (standard dropout, test-time). The two scaling conventions (inverted: divide by p at train; standard: multiply by p at test) are both correct but the t=60 board note 'divide by p' appears in the training context and could confuse a learner into thinking standard dropout also divides at training time -- the lesson conflates the two approaches at this point. The code block correctly uses nn.Dropout(p=1-p) which zeros with probability 1-p, consistent with the definition, but the comment says 'Dropout(p) zeros with probability p' in the code-content-decision notes which is accurate for PyTorch's API. The formula 'W_test = p * W_train' is correct for standard dropout."},{"id":"code-content-decision","label":"Code-content decision","max":6,"score":5,"notes":"Including code is the right decision -- inverted dropout is a practical detail that benefits from seeing nn.Dropout in context. The code is syntactically valid Python/PyTorch. The model.train() / model.eval() calls demonstrate the training vs. test-time switch, which is directly on-topic. Deduction: nn.Dropout(p=1-p) is used where p is the keep probability, making the argument (1-p) the drop probability -- this is correct but the variable naming is slightly confusing (the constructor parameter p in TwoLayerNet is the keep probability, while nn.Dropout's p is the drop probability). A brief inline comment clarifying this mapping would prevent a learner from misreading the API. Also, the code snippet doesn't show a forward pass with actual data, so the effect of model.eval() is not demonstrated concretely."},{"id":"pacing-and-density","label":"Pacing and density","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"Nine beats over 240 seconds gives roughly 27 seconds per beat on average. Beat spacing: 0,18,34,60,80,106,138,168,210 -- intervals of 18,16,26,20,26,32,30,42 seconds. The longest gap (42s, beats 168->210) covers inverted dropout justification and the code block, which is dense material -- appropriate. The shortest gaps (16-18s) cover simple definitional beats. No single beat handles more than two closely related ideas. The final summary beat at 210s fits within the 240s duration. Pacing is well-calibrated for intro level."},{"id":"redundancy-and-focus","label":"Redundancy and focus","max":8,"score":7,"notes":"The lesson stays tightly on the question (training mechanism + test-time behavior). Co-adaptation appears twice (beats 2 and 5) but the second mention is a payoff/resolution of the first, not pure repetition. The summary beat at 210s restates the destination but that is its purpose. Slight deduction: beat at t=106 re-explains 'implicit ensemble' and 'variance reduction' that were introduced at t=80 -- the connection to co-adaptation adds value but the ensemble/variance content is largely repeated before extending it."}],"totalScore":86,"maxScore":100,"percent":86,"topThreeIssues":["Math/notation consistency: the t=60 board note 'divide by p' (inverted dropout training-time scaling) appears before the lesson has introduced inverted dropout, conflating standard and inverted dropout conventions mid-lesson and potentially confusing learners about when each scaling applies.","Code clarity: nn.Dropout(p=1-p) uses mismatched variable semantics without sufficient inline annotation -- the outer constructor's p means keep-probability while PyTorch's Dropout p means drop-probability; an intro learner will likely misread the API usage.","Destination-narration mismatch: the lesson.destination references 'geometric mean of all 2^n subnetwork predictions' but the narration never uses the term 'geometric mean', leaving a conceptual gap between what the lesson promises and what it delivers."],"wouldRecommendForPipeline":true,"summary":"This is a strong intro-level lesson plan with a precise destination, well-sequenced staircase, and appropriate visual structure including three concrete network diagrams. The primary weakness is a mid-lesson conflation of standard and inverted dropout scaling conventions that could confuse learners, combined with a code block that introduces a variable-naming subtlety without sufficient annotation. Fixing the scaling narrative consistency and the code comment would make this pipeline-ready without structural changes."}
