{"candidateId":"eigenvectors-pca-v1-001","subjectId":"eigenvectors-pca","promptVariantId":"whiteboard-v1","criteria":[{"id":"payoff-concreteness","label":"Payoff concreteness","max":8,"score":6,"notes":"The payoff names a specific tool (scikit-learn's PCA), states a concrete mechanism (eigenvectors maximize variance quantified by eigenvalue), and frames the stake (dropping the rest loses the least possible information). It lacks a number or quantified threshold but is sharp and specific enough to reach the upper-generic band solidly."},{"id":"staircase-coherence","label":"Staircase coherence","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"The six rungs build cleanly: objective -> encoding -> constraint formulation -> Lagrange derivation -> eigenvalue interpretation -> ranking. No rung is redundant, and each is necessary. The only minor gap is that the covariance matrix definition (rung 2) implicitly assumes the learner knows mean-centering, which is not scaffolded, but this is reasonable given the stated learner level."},{"id":"destination-precision","label":"Destination precision","max":8,"score":8,"notes":"The destination names the exact constrained optimization problem, the Lagrangian, the resulting eigenvector equation C u = lambda u, the identity lambda = variance, and the ranking rule. A learner can hold every piece afterward. Full marks."},{"id":"narration-clarity","label":"Narration clarity","max":12,"score":10,"notes":"Almost all symbols are defined on first use: u, C, lambda, L, the projection expression. Jargon 'principal component analysis' is expanded immediately. One minor gap: the narration says 'two C u minus two lambda u equals zero' in the derivative step but does not remind the listener that this comes from differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to u treated as a vector (chain rule for quadratic forms), which could confuse learners not already fluent in matrix calculus. Otherwise sentences are concrete and no contradictions exist."},{"id":"board-specificity","label":"Board specificity","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"Every draw action is highly concrete: the scatter cloud specifies ~30 dots, an elongated ellipse at 45 degrees, labeled axes, centering, and relative spread. The projection diagram specifies a filled circle, dashed perpendicular, foot label, and small circle on the arrow. Write actions contain actual formulas, not placeholders. Minor deduction: the 'highlight' at t=130 says 'box in red' but is applied to targetId 'derivative' which was transformed at t=118 into 'C u = lambda u' -- the content description is slightly ambiguous about which text is being boxed."},{"id":"board-coherence","label":"Board coherence","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"The timeline is logical: data cloud drawn before arrow, arrow before variance expression, objective before Lagrangian, Lagrangian erased before variance-equals-lambda to prevent clutter. The transform at t=118 cleanly evolves the derivative into the eigenvector equation. One minor issue: the highlight at t=130 references targetId 'derivative' but the transform at t=118 overwrote that content to 'C u = lambda u'; this could cause a renderer ambiguity about whether to highlight the transformed or original text."},{"id":"board-visual-balance","label":"Board visual balance","max":8,"score":7,"notes":"The plan has three draw actions (scatter cloud, unit vector arrow, projection diagram) and multiple writes, highlights, and transforms. The scatter cloud with PCA arrows at t=215 is an excellent payoff visual. The projection diagram at t=78 adds geometric intuition. Balance is good for an intermediate math topic. One point deducted because the eigenvalue-as-variance substitution (the algebraic heart of the lesson) is shown only as text; a small annotated diagram showing the substitution step visually would strengthen it."},{"id":"math-notation-correctness","label":"Math and notation correctness","max":10,"score":9,"notes":"All formulas are correct: Lagrangian formation, gradient set to zero giving 2Cu - 2*lambda*u = 0, reduction to Cu = lambda u, and the substitution u^T C u = u^T (lambda u) = lambda * u^T u = lambda are all valid. Covariance matrix definition C = (1/n) X^T X is correct for mean-centered X. One minor inconsistency: the narration says 'C stretches or flips without changing direction' but flipping (eigenvalue negative) changes the direction (sign); for a positive-semidefinite covariance matrix eigenvalues are non-negative, so 'flips' is technically impossible here and mildly misleading."},{"id":"code-content-decision","label":"Code-content decision","max":6,"score":5,"notes":"No code is included, which is the correct decision for a derivation-focused lesson establishing the mathematical why. A scikit-learn snippet was mentioned in the payoff but not included in beats, which is appropriate -- adding code would dilute the derivation. One point deducted because including a one-line scikit-learn example at the end (e.g., pca.components_) with a brief label would have concretely closed the loop the payoff opened, at negligible cost."},{"id":"pacing-and-density","label":"Pacing and density","max":10,"score":8,"notes":"Seven beats across 270 seconds gives ~38 seconds per beat on average, appropriate for intermediate math. Beat at t=90 (55 seconds, ending at t=145) carries the Lagrangian setup and the eigenvector equation derivation -- the densest conceptual step -- and is the longest beat, which is correct prioritization. Beat at t=145 (25 seconds) covers only the eigenvector definition, which is light but serves as a deliberate pause after the derivation. No beat is catastrophically overloaded. Minor deduction: the final beat at t=210 (60 seconds remaining) packs ranking, orthogonality, and the conclusion, which is slightly dense."},{"id":"redundancy-and-focus","label":"Redundancy and focus","max":8,"score":7,"notes":"The lesson stays tightly on the question. The eigenvector definition beat at t=145 slightly restates what was just derived at t=90-118, but serves a pedagogical consolidation function rather than pure redundancy. No off-topic tangents. One point deducted for the mild restatement of the eigenvector concept across beats 4 and 5."}],"totalScore":87,"maxScore":100,"percent":87,"topThreeIssues":["The final beat (t=210) packs ranking by eigenvalue, orthogonality of eigenvectors, and the concluding synthesis into ~60 seconds, making it the densest beat in the lesson; splitting orthogonality into its own short beat or moving it earlier would improve pacing.","The narration states eigenvectors are directions C 'stretches or flips' but covariance matrices are positive semi-definite so eigenvalues are non-negative and flipping cannot occur; correcting this prevents a subtle misconception for learners who later encounter indefinite matrices.","The payoff promises to tie back to scikit-learn's PCA but no beat or board action closes that loop with even a one-line code label; adding a terminal beat showing pca.components_ with an annotation linking rows to eigenvectors would fulfill the payoff's concrete stake."],"wouldRecommendForPipeline":true,"summary":"This is a strong lesson plan with a precise destination, a well-ordered staircase, and concrete board actions that a renderer could execute without guessing. The mathematical derivation is correct and the visual balance is appropriate for an intermediate geometry-heavy topic. The main leverage points are a slightly overloaded final beat, a technically inaccurate 'flips' characterization for covariance eigenvectors, and a missed opportunity to close the scikit-learn loop that the payoff explicitly opens."}
